What do the following have in common?
Build an ark.
Choose 300 men.
March around the city seven times.
Follow this route to the Red Sea.
Did you figure it out?
Jehovah was providing
his people with direction.
And in the case of these examples,
sometimes that direction could appear to be,
let’s say, a bit unusual.
It’s not too hard for us
to imagine Noah responding,
“And you want me to build a massive ark?”
Or Gideon asking,
“Just 300 men
“against an army of 135,000
—are you sure?”
Or Joshua replying:
“March around Jericho seven times
“and just blow our horns?
That’s it?”
Or Moses saying,
“Why are we headed to the Red Sea
“when I believe
there is a much more direct route
to the Promised Land?”
They all could have responded in such ways,
but did they?
Let’s allow the Bible
to help us find the answer
in Genesis chapter 6.
At Genesis 6:22,
we find that “Noah did according
“to all that God had commanded him.
He did just so.”
In fact, in the examples we’ve mentioned,
they all “did just so.”
The direction might not have been
what they expected,
but they humbly made the mental turn,
so to speak,
and they followed the divine guidance
wherever it was taking them.
And because they did,
they saved not only themselves
but all those that were with them.
Clearly, the one leading them was Jehovah.
And by their responsive actions,
they were, in effect, saying to him:
“Where you go I will go.”
Well, what about you dear graduates
here before us today?
Like those faithful ones of old,
you are not alone in navigating your way.
Jehovah is where he has always been
—at the helm, guiding his people.
The only difference is that today
Jehovah is providing direction
through his “faithful and discreet slave,”
and it is
because of our limited understanding
that at times the direction may appear to be
a bit unusual.
Nonetheless,
you have followed that direction,
no matter what it was,
no matter where it was taking you.
And for that we want to say, “Thank you.”
In fact, we want to thank
all of you in our listening audience
for being responsive
toward the direction provided.
But we thank, especially,
you dear Gilead graduates before us today.
Now, why?
Because during the five months
that we have spent with you,
we saw you.
We saw how you closely followed
the direction of the faithful slave.
You “did just so.”
For example,
when presenting your student assignments,
you did so in English,
even though, for most of you,
that was not your mother tongue.
And when COVID protocols were set in place,
we saw you follow all of them,
even though they might
have been inconvenient,
in order to keep you
and your classmates healthy.
And when you were given counsel,
not only from your instructors
but from each other,
you expressed gratitude for it
and immediately went to work at applying it.
We saw you grow in your love for one another,
for God’s organization,
for Jehovah, and for his Son, Jesus.
All of this was a direct result
of your sensitivity
to the direction of the faithful slave.
But what about after you leave this place?
Even if you are assigned back
to your country of origin,
you won’t be the same person that left
and things may not be the way
you remember them either.
However, we have full confidence
that whatever future changes come your way,
you will continue echoing the sentiments
of the Moabitess Ruth.
Recall when she was faced with numerous,
intimidating changes
what she said to Naomi.
Her words are recorded for us
in Ruth chapter 1, the book bearing her name,
verses 16 and 17:
“Ruth said:
“‘Do not plead with me to abandon you,
“‘to turn back from accompanying you;
“‘for where you go
“‘I will go,
“‘and where you spend the night,
I will spend the night.
“‘Your people will be my people,
and your God my God.
“‘Where you die I will die,
“‘and there I will be buried.
“‘May Jehovah do so to me
and add to it if anything but death
should separate me from you.’”
Now, what did all of this
actually mean for Ruth?
It meant leaving what was familiar to her.
It meant adopting a people
with beliefs different from hers.
It meant following customs
that could result in her becoming
the wife of someone
she did not choose or did not even know,
for that matter.
It meant never returning
to what she had left behind.
When Ruth said to Naomi:
“Where you go I will go,”
she meant with no clauses,
no exceptions, no bargaining.
It was without question.
For Ruth, these were not just words;
it was her mindset.
It was the same mindset that Noah,
Gideon, Joshua, and Moses had.
And like them, if we endeavor
to always see the one behind the direction,
we will be able to move
in heart harmony with the chariot
—not under it,
not behind it, right alongside it.
In fact, this thought brings back to my mind
a fond memory.
I recall that when my wife and I
lived in South Africa,
I once observed a flock of birds in motion.
What species?
I do not know.
But I’m sure
they numbered into the thousands.
And as they swirled and turned
as a group in unison,
it was a beautiful,
magnificent sight to behold.
What’s interesting is that scientists think
that each bird focuses,
not on the entire flock,
but on just a few
of its most nearest neighbors in flight.
When those near them turn,
they turn.
Each one does this,
creating a sort of harmonious wave effect.
Well, in a similar way,
when we display
by our speech and actions the mindset:
‘Jehovah,
where you and your slave go I will go,’
we motivate others near us to do the same.
When a change in theocratic direction comes
and we make the turn,
then our spiritual brothers and sisters
make the turn with us.
And when Jehovah’s people turn in sync,
in mid-flight, so to speak,
it is a beautiful thing
in the eyes of Jehovah.
Just as Noah, Gideon,
Joshua, Moses, and Ruth
set the pattern for all of us,
now dear graduates,
it is your turn
to set the pattern for others.
As you continue to follow closely
the direction provided by Jehovah
through his faithful slave,
others will see his blessing upon you.
They will see how
he is keeping you safe and secure.
They will see your joy and contentment.
And out of a keen desire
to have that same experience,
they too will be motivated to say:
“Where you go I will go.”